
tags: #aws, #s3

-  Security:
	- User Based: IAM policies.
	- Resource Based:
	- Bucket Policies: bucket wide rules - allows cross account.
	- Object Access Control List(ACL) - finer grained.
	- Bucket Access Control List(ACL) - less common.
	**Note**: an IAM principal can access S3 object if
	- The user IAM permission **ALLOW** it ***OR*** ther resourse policy **ALLOWS** it
	- ***AND*** there's no explicit **DENY**.

	Use policy generator to create S3 Bucket Policies.
- Static Website Hosting
	- Only works if public reads is enabled.
	-  Enable in Properties -> Static Website hosting.
- Versioning:
	- It's enabled on the bucket level.
	- Same key will change the version of the file.
	- It's best practice to version buckets.
		- Protected against unintended deletes.
		- Easy roll back to prev version. If versioning was enabled deleting will create delete marker(new version, so the file still remains and can be restored by delete the `delete marker`)
	Notes:
	- Any file that is not versioned prior to enabling will have version null.
	- Suspending versioning doesn't delete prev versions.
- Replication(CRR & SRR):
	- Versioning must be enabled in source and destination buckets.
	- CRR - cross region replication
	- SRR - same region replication.
	- Buckets can be in different accounts.
	- Copying is async.
	 Use Cases:
	 - CRR - compliance, lower latency
	 - SRR - log aggregation, live replication between prod and test.
- Storage Classes:
	- Standard - general purpose - 99.99%(not available 53min per year) | Big Data, web applications ...
	- Standard-Infrequent Access(AI) - 99,9% | Disaster recovery, backups
	- One Zone-Infrequent Access - 99.5%, single AZ(all data is lost when AZ is destroyed) - secondary copies of backup data or data the can be recreated.
	- Glacier Instant Retrieval
	- Glacier Flexible Retrieval.
	- Glacier Deep Archive.
	- Intelligent Tiering.
	Objects can be mowed between classes or using S3 Lifecycle configurations.
	S3 Durability same for all classes(99,9999999999%), availability is different across classes.
	Storage Class can be configured per each object or a rule can be created to upload objects by default to certain SC, Intlligent Tiering for example.

Storage Classes:

|Feature|Standard|Intelligent-Tiering|Standard-IA|One Zone-IA|Glacier Instant Retrieval|Glacier Flexible Retrieval|Glacier Deep Archive|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Durability**|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|99.999999999% (11 9’s)|
|**Availability**|99.99%|99.9%|99.9%|99.5%|99.9%|99.99%|99.99%|
|**Availability SLA**|99.9%|99%|99%|99%|99%|99.9%|99.9%|
|**Availability Zones**|>= 3|>= 3|>= 3|1|>= 3|>= 3|>= 3|
|**Min. Storage Duration Charge**|None|None|30 Days|30 Days|90 Days|90 Days|180 Days|
|**Min. Billable Object Size**|None|None|128 KB|128 KB|128 KB|40 KB|40 KB|
|**Retrieval Fee**|None|None|Per GB retrieved|Per GB retrieved|Per GB retrieved|Per GB retrieved|Per GB retrieved|

Storage Classes Prices:

|Feature|Standard|Intelligent-Tiering|Standard-IA|One Zone-IA|Glacier Instant Retrieval|Glacier Flexible Retrieval|Glacier Deep Archive|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Storage Cost (per GB per month)**|$0.023|$0.0025 - $0.023|$0.0125|$0.01|$0.004|$0.0036|$0.00099|
|**Retrieval Cost (per 1000 requests)**|GET: $0.0004 POST: $0.005|GET: $0.0004 POST: $0.005|GET: $0.001 POST: $0.01|GET: $0.001 POST: $0.01|GET: $0.01 POST: $0.02|Expedited: $10 Standard: $0.05 Bulk: Free|Standard: $0.10 Bulk: $0.025|
|**Retrieval Time**|Instantaneous|Instantaneous|Instantaneous|Instantaneous|Expedited (1–5 mins) Standard (3–5 hours) Bulk (5–12 hours)|Expedited (1–5 mins) Standard (3–5 hours) Bulk (5–12 hours)|Standard (12 hours) Bulk (48 hours)|
|**Monitoring Cost (per 1000 objects)**|-|$0.0025|-|-|-|-|-|
- Encryption:
	- Server-Side encryption - always on by default. Happens when you upload file to the bucket.
	- Client-Side encryption - object is encrypted prior to uploading by the user.
- IAM Access Analyzer for S3:
	- Allows to track who has access to the bucket, file etc.
- AWS Snowball
	- Secured portable devices to collect and process data at the edge, and migrate data into and out of AWS.
	- Help migrates Petabytes of data or used for edge computing(areas with bad internet connections(ships, trucks, mines etc.))

S3 Transfer Acceleration - tool to transfer the files using private AWS network to diff AZ instead of direct upload.